Our next topic relates to
categorizing data in Python.
First, let's take a moment to
consider another environment
where we apply categories.
We'll think about
working in the kitchen.
When cooking, we can
categorize the ingredients we
use; for example, carrots and
peppers are vegetables,
and chicken and beef are meat.
These categories are important
because they affect how we
handle these ingredients.
When working in Python,
data types achieve
a similar purpose.
A data type is a category
for a particular
type of data item.
Python uses several data types.
We'll focus on string,
float, integer,
Boolean, and list data.
When we printed the text
"Hello Python!" in our
previous video,
this was an example of a string.
String data is
data consisting
of an ordered sequence
of characters.
These characters
could be letters,
symbols, spaces,
and even numbers.
Numbers in the string data type
cannot be used for calculations.
All characters in a string must
be placed inside
quotation marks.
Luckily, Python will tell you by
giving you an error message
if you forget a quotation mark.
Let's use our code
from before and
explore what happens when we
leave off the quotation mark.
Notice how one of
our quotation marks is missing
at the end of the string.
When we run this code,
we'll receive an error message.
Python also supports
numeric data types as well.
When working with numeric data,
we don't put quotation
marks around the data.
Numeric data includes
floats and integers.
Float data is data
consisting of a number
with a decimal point.
This includes fractions like 2.1 or 10.5.
It also includes
whole numbers with a
decimal point like 2.0 or
10.0.
Integer data is
data consisting of
a number that does not
include a decimal point.
Numbers such as 0,
-9, and 5,000
are valid integers.
So far, we've used the print
function to output a string.
But it can also be
used with float
and integer types
for calculations.
Let's try out an
example of this.
First, since it's good practice,
let's add a comment to explain
the purpose of our code.
Then, we'll tell Python
what to calculate.
The output gives us the answer.
1 plus 1 is 2.
We can use print with
float and integer data to
perform all kinds of mathematical
operations like addition,
subtraction, multiplication,
and division.
The third data type in
Python is called a Boolean.
Boolean data is data that can
only be one of two values:
either True or False.
Booleans are useful for
logic in our programs.
For example, let's compare numbers and
determine the Boolean values
of these comparisons.
First, we'll use the
print function to
evaluate if 10 is
less than 5.
Then, we'll also evaluate if 9
is less than 12.
So, what do you think?
10 is not less than 5,
but 9 is less than 12, right?
Let's see how Python handles
this when we run it.
Python agrees.
The first line of output
tells us that it's
False to say 10 is
less than 5.
The second tells us it's True
to say 9 is less than 12.
We'll use Boolean more when we
start including
conditions in our code.
And the last data type
we'll cover is lists.
List data is a data
structure that
consists of a collection of
data in sequential form.
We'll create and
print a list that
prints all the usernames of
the three individuals that
have access to a
confidential file.
First, we'll add our comment
about an intention
to print this list.
After the keyword print,
we'll add our list.
We need to place the
list in brackets.
After this, we place
the individual items in
the list in quotation marks
and separate them with commas.
Now let's run this.
As expected, we get the list.
When it prints, it
still has the brackets.
This is just the beginning of
what you can do with lists.
As you grow with
your Python skills,
you'll learn about
how you can access
and edit individual
items in the list.
So that was a brief summary of
five major data types in Python:
string, integer, float,
Boolean, and list.
These data types are some of
the more common ones you'll work
with as we progress
through our lessons.